i love an unsolved mystery in physics
mainly because i just
love talking about the stuff that we
don't know right those are my favorite
bits of science that's what
researchers after all now because my
research
is you know galaxies and supermassive
black holes things that are
you know millions to billions of light
years away i often fall into the trap of
thinking that
compared to the many many many many
things that we don't know about the
universe as a whole
we know a lot more about our own
backyard of the universe you know the
solar system
but i'd be so wrong because there's so
much that we still don't know
about our own solar system and in
particular what's going on at the
edge of the solar system you know the
the far
end of the backyard that you can't quite
see from
the house and in particular there is an
unexplained
excess of particles in a ribbon
reflecting back at us that
we cannot explain
all right this odd ribbon of particles
is known as the ibex
ribbon named after the satellite that
first detected it
the interstellar boundary explorer which
was launched back in 2008 and has been
detecting particles from the edge of the
solar system
ever since now the particles that it
detects are called
ena's energetic neutral
atoms but what are they and where do
they come from
so we define the edge of the solar
system as where particles which are
streamed off by the sun
impact with particles from interstellar
space so in the very under dense gas
that you find
between stars now if you remember the
voyager crafts
actually crossed that boundary a couple
of years ago now sort of recording
the number of particles detected from
the sun and the number of particles that
you could detect from interstellar space
and seeing one drop and one increase as
they crossed
that boundary essentially the particles
that are streamed out by the sun
form a protective bubble around the
solar system which we call
the heliosphere now the sun is mostly
made of hydrogen right so as you can
imagine
most of the particles in this solar wind
that's
streamed off the sun is also hydrogen
they're incredibly energetic and they
move incredibly fast
through space they're also ionized atoms
which means that instead of having the
electron orbiting the proton the proton
and the electron are free to move about
however they want to
so you have free floating positive and
negative ions that's something we call
a plasma now this plasma in the solar
wind is essentially what forms
this protective bubble around the solar
system this heliosphere
that protects us from the very worst of
cosmic rays and radiation
now at the very edge of that bubble of
the heliosphere where the solar wind
plasma
meets this very under dense gas of the
interstellar medium just made of very
like
low energy atoms of hydrogen and helium
that sort of maybe a couple of the
heavier elements you can have
a collision of one of these plasma ions
with these slow-moving atoms
if that happens you can have what's
called a charge exchange
take place between them there's a really
fancy way of saying that the ion comes
in
and steals an electron from the atom
and then that ion goes back to being a
neutral hydrogen atom
but it doesn't lose any energy in that
process so what you've essentially
created is a very
energetic neutral atom in ena
and you've left behind a very slow
moving
ion in the interstellar medium
essentially what happens
is you reflect back the energy
or the solar wind of the sun and turn it
from plasma into neutral atoms
at that boundary you can think of it as
kind of like an
echo of the solar wind of the sun
bouncing back towards us so these enas
is what ibex actually
is able to detect and it's not easy
first of all because the count rate is
just really
low it only detects something like 600
or so
of these particles per day and that's it
the other difficult thing is that uv
photons can mimic
the same signature as one ena produces
in the detector so
uv light from the sun and those count
rates are anything from sort of like a
thousand
to ten million times the ena
rate that it's counting per day also
you've got to keep out
charged particles as well you've got to
measure the mass and the energy of the
ena
coming in you have got to be able
to measure the direction that the ena
comes from as well because if you don't
know the direction it's come from
that's not helpful and you've got to do
all of that on a satellite that's easy
enough to launch
into space so it's definitely not one of
the easiest things that you can do
in space but nasa managed to do it with
the ibex detector
it's not perfect it could be improved
and hopefully it will be improved upon
on the future
so the direction that the particles are
coming from it's very
difficult to actually get at that so the
precision is not great it means that the
maps of where these particles are coming
from in the sky are quite
grainy than sort of we're used to seeing
with these super high resolutions say
telescopes
that were you know with actual light
rather than just detecting
neutral atoms but despite that though in
november 2009
ibex released its very first results
from its observations
running through 2009 and found something
completely
unexpected and inexplicable
to put this into context what people
expected was a fairly uniform
signal right the sun is a sphere and it
outputs
these plasma solar wind particles in all
directions away from that sphere
and the interstellar gas pervading stars
was not thought to really vary that much
either
so it was expected that it was going to
be a uniform signal that really only had
sort of like
statistical fluctuations in it
instead they found what was dubbed by
christina prested a grad student on the
team at the time
a ribbon around the sky where the amount
of these energetic
neutral atoms these enas that they were
detected was
two to three times higher in intensity
than
everywhere else on the sky now you
should note that it's an
arc shape in these images because we're
taking something that's a 3d
sphere on the sky and projecting it down
to something flat so
you will have noticed this before if
you've seen images from sort of mission
control
on satellite or rocket launches where
they have the orbit
of the rocket or the satellite sort of
overlaid on a map
of the earth which is a 3d sphere that's
projected down into two dimensions and
you'll see that even though the rocket
is just taking you know
straight line orbit around the earth
when you plot that overlaid on a 2d map
of it it turns into sort of
a sine wave and it's the same thing
you've got here you've got this
ibex ribbon that's coming from sort of a
plane in space which then when you
project it down onto 2d you get this
sort of like sine wave arc
shape now there's been many different
hypotheses
posed over the years to try and explain
the ibex ribbon the discovery paper back
in 2009 led by mccomas and collaborators
gave six different suggestions for how
this thing could have been
made now one of the more popular
suggestions from that paper that people
have sort of ran with over the years
is that it's caused by the intersection
of the heliosphere
with the galactic magnetic field so just
like how the earth has a magnetic field
and the sun has a magnetic field
so too does the galaxy so magnetic field
can act a little bit like a mirror
reflecting
more of these particles back into the
solar system
where this solar wind plasma intersects
this magnetic field
so where any of these plasma particles
actually make it
out and past the boundary of the
heliosphere and into interstellar space
they can actually sort of get funneled
by the magnetic field lines until
they're actually
orbiting the magnetic field lines and
whilst they're doing that if they still
end up impacting
with you know a neutral atom in the
interstellar medium
then again they can have this charge
exchange where they steal
an electron thing is once they then do
that they become neutral and neutral
particles aren't affected
by magnetic fields and so as they've
been orbiting and orbiting and orbiting
these magnetic field lines sort of
trapped there
as soon as that happens they're then
sort of released from that orbit so it's
a little bit like releasing a discus and
they're released
in a straight line essentially from this
magnetic field line which is why you get
sort of this
amplified signal supposedly where the
heliosphere
intersects this magnetic field this was
modeled back in 2010
by here at cusin and they showed that
you could really clearly get
that sort of arc like shape in this
ribbon
shape if that was actually occurring and
then further work by schwardrum and
macomb is in 2013
showed that plasma particles would
essentially get trapped in these orbits
around these magnetic
field lines and you should get this
build up of plasma particles over time
and that would explain why you've got
this
overly amplified signal over sort of you
know the general
background that you see in the rest of
the sky of these enas
from this specific location where the
heliosphere
meets this galactic magnetic field of
the milky way
but there is another hypothesis floating
around astrophysics circles that's
gaining in popularity
as well that could explain what's going
on at the edge of the solar system but
also have an impact possibly on
future intrepid martian astronauts
right let's do the math so this one says
instead of the solar system moving
through
generic boring old average interstellar
medium
it's actually about to enter a large
nebula of hot
dense gas that's called the local
bubble the ribbon reveals where the edge
of the heliosphere is currently
intersecting
with the edge of the local bubble so
detecting the ibex ribbon could be sort
of our first
warning signal of this because to see it
so clearly
already must mean we're well on our way
to becoming part of
the bubble so people have actually
calculated that perhaps even in a
hundred
years the solar system could be fully
embedded
in this local bubble now there's nothing
to
worry about necessarily we think that
the solar system has passed through
similar regions of sort of hot
dense gas uh nebulas before
all it would mean is that the
heliosphere would first will probably
shrink just a little bit just sort of
dealing with that pressure of that hot
gas
outside of it but also that the amount
of cosmic radiation and cosmic rays that
make it
into the solar system would probably
increase
which means that anybody outside of that
sort of second
layer of protection of the earth's
atmosphere
would need to take precautions so
anybody on the international space
station for example
anybody perhaps setting up future lunar
bases
on the moon or perhaps any future
mars colonizers would also need to take
this into account
and think about how they could mitigate
for the effects of cosmic rays
and radiation i know that was low on the
list of priorities for mark watney but
i'm guessing space agencies will
probably care about it
but that's only if this hypothesis turns
out to be
true which you know this thing is still
an unsolved mystery so the local bubble
hypothesis the magnetic mirror
hypothesis or
any of the other five hypotheses that
were raised in that
first discovery paper now none of those
are accepted
theory yet as always we need more data
and crucially we need to observe whether
this ibex ribbon is
changing over time so if we observe you
know within the next century or so
that the ibex ribbon is growing then
perhaps that will give a lot more weight
this idea of when moving into this
local bubble region of space of this you
know nebula of hot
dense gas but if it stays fairly
constant
with time and doesn't change then
perhaps we'll favor
the galactic magnetic field this
magnetic
mirror sort of hypothesis and maybe
it'll shrink with time and we'll have to
come up with a completely new hypothesis
to explain it until we have that data
though
this ibex ribbon is gonna remain one of
those
weird and wonderful unsolved mysteries
quick ad break before we get to the
bloopers i just want to say thank you to
this week's video sponsor brilliant
brilliant is a
website with problem-solving courses
that get you to learn by doing rather
than
just by watching youtube videos the
courses are really interactive and
fun and they break things down into easy
to understand
chunks ultimately they teach you how to
think
logically like a scientist so you know
how to approach a problem that you're
trying to solve
if you're interested in how scientists
come up with hypotheses to explain
things like the ibex ribbon
brilliant has a great course on
scientific essentials that covers
you know not just the science basics
like the difference between ions and
atoms or the states of matter like the
plasma we talked about in the solar wind
but also the organization of knowledge
in science and how to
design an experiment to test a new
hypothesis as well
if that course sounds good to you then
head over to brilliant.org forward slash
dr becky that's
k d-r-b-e-c-k-y and sign up for free and
the first 200 of you to go to that link
will also get 20 off an annual premium
subscription so if you like the sound of
that then head over there and say a
big thank you from me particles which
are streamed off by the sun
impact with particles from interspelus
interspeller
into speller space puts this solar wind
in
all directions away from that sphere
this pistol
we're not talking about weaponry from
lord of the rings
different ways of explaining this thing
sam
oh i thought you were upstairs i kept
seeing a shadow move under the door and
i got a bit freaked out i thought you
were out
i'm thinking about the magnetic mirror
oh yes i'm asking it to reflect
i've got i'm quite overly proud of that
one i've got